---
layout: post
title:  "Axelrod's model of cultural dissemination"
date:   2016-03-03 10:18:25 -0800
---
When XXXX introducing this basic grid in my previous post I made the off hand statement that "proximity is 9/10ths of a relationship". This is something I remember hearing at one time and it has stayed with me. In 1997 [Robert Axelrod published](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~axe/research/Dissemination.pdf) his now famous model of cultural dissemination using cellular automata. The model gives computational and theoretical basis for studying the emergence of culture through the interactions between individuals. With simple rules the model enables study of the effect of individuals having similiar traits becoming more similar, as well as the possible counter effect in which tendency toward local similarity leads to global polarization.

####How to win friends and influence other cellular automata

<div id="grid"></div>

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/d3/3.5.16/d3.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/underscore.js/1.8.3/underscore.js"></script>

<script src="/assets/custom_js/axelrod_border_2.js"></script>

Every cell takes its random turn to possibly interact with a random neighbor. The likihood of the active cell adopting a trait of his neighbor is based on the similarities they already share. The more they have in common, the higher the probability the active cell will adopt yet another trait its neighbor. But in this model, if they have nothing in common, no trait will be adopted. Neither will a trait be adopted if both cells already share identical traits. 

####Is culture stable or dynamic, or somehow both?

In Axelrod's model regions of contiguous cells with fixed inactive states are said to be stable. This characterization might seem a bit sterile when thinking about the richness or complexity that culture is sometimes meant to convey. But it is the dynamic quality of continual interaction between neighbors and zones that I find strangely expressive of real-world cultural volitility. The visualization may at times show narrow cooridors of quiet interaction, while elsewhere broad arenas of  chaotic tumult ensues. And then we may also see a few sections behind walled fortresses of quiet stability.

####Spare me the details

I will not attempt to document the theoretical details of Axelrod's model and its permutations. There are many research papers and simulations available online. I am also not providing any ability to vary the input of cultural traits. Such traits are expressed with vectors of arbitrary size and number of numerical values. This would seem to defeat the whole purpose of research to study the effects that such a variety of conditions has. But for now, I am glad to have explored and experimented with the ideas behind Axelrod's research. (For the record, I have use 5 features, each having 5 traits. For those who are interested, a link to the code is provided below).

####Near and far

In 2016 the idea of physical nearness remains important. I like MeetUps and hacker spaces. People commute in heavy traffic everyday just to work in the same building at computers which are connected over the Internet. Yet the Internet explodes the dimensions of the networked world. It connects us to places that are very different, and it shows us the many ways we are similar. Our world may becoming more homogeounous at the same time we are being exposed to its richness in variety. 

####The network is next

The grid remains a facinating context to explore graph-like relationships. We still walk on floors, drive through blocks, and compare columns and rows of numbers. But we also learn with neural networks and communicate with networks of people around the world.

I am wondering now what that model might be like...

[Javascript code used in this visualization](https://github.com/Qyoom/qyoom.github.io/tree/master/assets/custom_js/axelrod_border_2.js)


